Glenn Abastillas / Data Scientist / NLP Developer
FLAT A, 143 Grosvenor Ave, N5 2NH • glenn.abastillas@gmail.com • +1 (201) 316-7670

Summary.
Data scientist, natural language processing (NLP) developer, and computational linguist with over seven years of experience developing NLP and machine learning (ML) algorithms, dashboards,data visualizations, and supporting research in the health domain. He takes a human-centered design approach to developing solutions and software for clients.

Nationality: American (Authorised to work in the UK)
Languages: English, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Cebuano, Arabic, Vietnamese, and Mandarin.
Skills.
Languages and Markup
Python, R, SQL, JavaScript, Lua, Java, PHP, Visual Basic
Markup and Data Formats
HTML, XML, YAML, CSS, Markdown, JSON, HL7, FHIR
Development IDEs
Anaconda, Spyder, Jupyter, SageMaker, RStudio, I2E
Distributed Computing
Spark, Hadoop, Multithreading
Environments and Repos
Docker, Anaconda, GitHub, Azure Repository
Dashboards
Power BI, Tableau
Visual Editing
Visio, Draw.io, Photoshop, Vegas, Corel, Illustrator
Office Software
Word, PowerPoint, Excel, Access, Outlook, Visio
Certifications
Registered Nurse, Basic Life Support, Translator, Scrum Master
Experience.
Booz Allen Hamilton • Sr. Data Scientist • Washington, DC • 2018 – Present
Management Consulting firm where I work with cross-functional teams to deliver NLP, ML, and design thinking solutions to meet client needs at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Veterans Affairs (VA).

Lead data science efforts in collaboration with human centered design teams
Plan projects, elicit requirements, iterate on deliverables, and present reports to client
Develop NLP and machine learning algorithms, topic models, and automated pipelines
Develop browser-based tools for workshops, presentations, and client engagement
Conduct design thinking and requirements gathering workshops with stakeholders
Founded and led rapid response team to address urgent, ad-hoc client needs
Information Management Systems, Inc. • NLP Query Specialist • Calverton, MD • 2016 – 2018
Technology consulting firm where I worked with cross-functional teams at the NIH to identify client needs and develop NLP and ML solutions and presented results at conferences in the US and Canada.

Developed NLP algorithms for information extraction of data elements from pathology reports
Developed data pipelines for ETL procedures and for structuring unstructured pathology data
Provided Arabic language support for cancer data capture from the Middle East
Trained annotators and custom-built annotation tools to curate custom datasets for each project
3M - Health Information Systems • Computational Linguist • Silver Spring, MD • 2015 – 2016
Technology firm where I worked with cross-functional teams across the US to develop clinical decision support functionality for enterprise electronic medical record software developed by the firm.

Developed NLP algorithms for clinical decision support modules in electronic medical records
Employed NLP for information extraction on medical reports to develop knowledge resources
Created clinical language ontologies used to detect medical entities
Ran unit tests for clinical decision support modules written by other developers
Center for Applied Linguistics • Programme Associate • Washington, DC • 2013 – 2015
Linguist research and development firm where I worked with test developers and other linguists to develop high-quality language assessment data items for heritage language speakers across the US.

Developed Python scripts for various projects to streamline ETL of language data
Conducted unit tests on interactive web-based test items and visuals
Reviewed language test items in English and Spanish to test item visuals, language, and difficulty
Schreiber Translations, Inc. • Spanish and German Translator • Rockville, MD • 2013 – Present
Worked to provide high-fidelity English translations of various types of sensitive documents.

Translated sensitive legal documents to English from source languages for federal clients
Reviewed translations performed by other translations for linguistic streamlining of narrative
Mathematica Policy Research • Multilingual Field Interviewer • Princeton, NJ • 2011 – 2013
Public policy research firm where I worked to collect data for various monitoring and evaluation projects.

Interviewed hard to reach populations across the US who are recipients of federal programmes
Educated participants of surveys evaluating federal programmes on tracking and gathering programme-specific data such as tracking food purchases and consumption
Located hard to reach respondents with tools such as Accurint to ensure studies and surveys maintain adequate responses for analysis
Hackensack University Medical Center • Registered Nurse • Hackensack, NJ • 2010 – 2011
Regional trauma center where I worked with multi-disciplinary teams to provide high quality nursing to improve patient health outcomes and ensured continuity of care for patients and family members.

Admitted ambulatory, acute, and transfer patients to the epilepsy monitoring unit
Administered medications via various routes of administration
Coordinate care with healthcare providers and provide nursing care to patients and family
Educated patients and family members on home care and medication upon discharge
Education.
Georgetown University, Masters Degree in Linguistics, 2013 – 2015
Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, Bachelor’s Degree in Science, 2006 – 2010
Publications.
Abastillas, G (2018). “You are what you tweet: A Divergence in code-switching practices in Cebuano and English speakers in the Philippines”. Language & Literature in a Glocal World. Singapore: Springer.

Abastillas, G. L.; Morris, S. D.; Boten, J. A.; Tumurchudur, T.; Vora, K.; Fearn, P. F. (2017). Characterizing a Learning Curve for Annotating Data for Training and Validation of Natural Language Processing Systems. Poster presented at: American Medical Informatics Association Annual Symposium; 2017 November 4 – 8: Washington, DC.

Abastillas, G.; Lam, C.; Petkov, V.; Adamo, P.; Coyle, L.; Stevens, J.; Wu, X. C.; Hsieh, M. C.; Negoita, S (2017). Data Quality Audit on Melanoma Tumor Depth with Rule-Based Natural Language Processing. Poster presented at: North American Association of Central Cancer Registries (NAACCR) Annual Conference; 2017 June 19 – 22; Albuquerque, NM.

Abastillas, G.; Lam, C. (2017). Data Quality Audits with Rule-Based Natural Language Processing. Presented at: Georgetown NLP Summit; 2017 June 28; Washington, DC.
